feature/284_property-validation-base (#285)
exasol/virtual-schema-common-java: doc/user_requirements.md

# System Requirement Specification (SRS) Virtual Schema Common Java (VSCJ) 

This document contains the system requirements for the Java bottom-layer base library for all Exasol Virtual Schema adapters.

## Features

### Property Validation
`feat~property-validation~1`

> The VSCJ library provides the infrastructure for validating the input coming from virtual schema properties.

Reviewer: Can you add a link providing details about what `virtual schema properties` are?

Reviewer: Ah, I see you have details below.

Author: Added terms section and referenced it.

Needs: req

## High-level Requirements

### Property Validation

Users provide properties with virtual schema definitions that serve as configuration.

Here is a non-exhaustive list of typical properties that should give an idea of what they are used for:

1. Name under which the virtual schema can be found in the Exasol database
2. ID of the connection object that stores the access data to the data source
3. Log level
4. Target host for logs
5. Connection type selector
6. Feature switch

Please refer to [Appendix A — Known Virtual Schema Property Types](#appendix-a--known-virtual-schema-property-types) for a more complete list.

Note that some of these properties have relationships that require to validate them together. In the Exasol Virtual Schema for instance, the selected connection type decides which other connection properties are required.

Also, some of the validations are so dialect-specific, that covering them in the VSCJ base library is not reasonable.

#### Validating the Existence of Mandatory Properties
`req~validating-the-existence-of-mandatory-properties~1`

> VSCJ allows validating that a mandatory virtual schema property is set.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit confusing. Maybe rephrase it.

Reviewer: Maybe:
```
VSCJ must implement a validation that a mandatory virtual schema property is set.
```

Author: Fixed.

Covers:

* [`feat~property-validation~1`](#property-validation)

Needs: req

#### Validating That an Optional Property Is Allowed
`req~validating-that-an-optional-property-is-allowed~1`

> VSCJ allows validating that a property the user provides is a valid optional property.

Reviewer: Same as above

Author: Fixed.

Needs: req

#### Validating Properties with Multi-Select Enumerations
`req~validating-properties-with-multi-select-enumerations~1`

VSCJ validates that a property contains a comma-separated list of values, each belonging to the predefined set of valid enumeration values.

Rationale:

Some properties may allow multiple selections from a set of predefined options. For example, `EXCLUDED_CAPABILITIES` might specify features to disable, such as `ABS`, `REPEAT`, or `UNICODE`. Validating that all values in the list are part of the allowed enumeration prevents misconfiguration and ensures proper behavior.

Covers:

* [`feat~property-validation~1`](#property-validation)

Needs: req

#### Validating Properties With Unix Paths
`req~validating-properties-with-unix-paths~1`

VSCJ validates that a property contains a valid Unix path.

Rationale:

Document-based virtual schemas need a mapping file that is located in BucketFS.

Covers:

* [`feat~property-validation~1`](#property-validation)

Needs: req

#### Validation Dependencies
`req~validation-dependencies~1`

VSCJ allows an adapter for an SQL dialect to enforce dependent validations.

Rationale:

> Not all properties exist in isolation. In the Exasol virtual schema for example, which connection properties are required depends on which connection options are selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all properties exist in isolation.In the Exasol virtual schema for example, the required connection properties depend on the selected connection options.
```

Note that the relationships can be complicated and highly dialect-specific, so any attempt to cover everything in VSCJ is bound to fail. Instead, we must only make sure in VSCJ that dialects can combine validations in a flexible way. Details and constraints are up to the [software design](design.md).

Covers:

* [`feat~property-validation~1`](#property-validation)

Needs: req

### Known Limitations

* For now, we limit the property validation to the value syntax and ranges.

> * We don't validate that database objects that are referenced, actually exist during value validation.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* During value validation, we do not check if the referenced database objects actually exist.
```
